# Helper Functions

## Learning Goals

At the end of this lesson we will be able to:

- Understand and use helper functions
- Refactor larger functions into smaller pieces

## Introduction

A helper function is a function that does part of the work for another function.  They make our code easier to read by breaking long functions up into smaller pieces.  We recommend giving helper functions descriptive names, to help with readability.

Imagine we want to build a tool that will convert a temperature in fahrenheit to celsius, and a temperature in celsius to fahrenheit. There are two different rules that the temperature converter must know about. It would be reasonable to place these conversion formulas into two separate helper functions `convert_to_celsius` and `convert_to_fahrenheit`.

```python

def convert_to_fahrenheit(temp):
    return 9/5*temp + 32

def convert_to_celsius(temp):
    return 5/9*(temp-32)

```

Then, we could write another function `temp_converter` that takes the temperature and the unit of measurement as parameters, and calls `convert_to_celsius` or `convert_to_fahrenheit` depending on the unit.

```python

def temp_converter(temp, unit)
    if unit == "fahrenheit":
           return convert_to_celsius(temp)
   elif unit == "celsius"
           return convert_to_fahrenheit(temp)

```

## Exercise:  Breaking Up `guess_the_number`

The function `guess_the_number` can be broken up into two conceptual pieces, getting user input, and then processing the user input.  

1.  Start by writing a function called `get_number_from_user`
    * Then pull all of the pieces of code in `guess_the_number` that have to do with getting user input into `get_number_from_user`.  
    * Include any conditional statement that validate user input as a number.  
    * This function should ask the user for a number and then give an error message if the user inputs anything other than a number.  
    * Last, it should return the valid user input, or None if there was no valid input.  
    * In `guess_the_number`, call this function and store the result in user_input.
1.  Then the `guess_the_number` function can use the previous `if...else` statements to tell the user if their guess was too high or too low.
 
<details>
<summary> Our version at this point </summary>

```python

import random

RANGE_LOW = 0
RANGE_HIGH = 100
# pick a random number
random_number = random.randint(RANGE_LOW, RANGE_HIGH)


def guess_the_number():

    user_input = get_number_from_user()

    if user_input < RANGE_LOW or user_input > RANGE_HIGH:
        print(f"Your guess is out of bounds.")
        print(f"It must be between {RANGE_LOW} and {RANGE_HIGH}")
    elif user_input == random_number:
        print("You guessed the number!  Good job!")
    elif user_input > random_number:
        print("Your guess is too high")
    elif user_input < random_number:
        print("Your guess is too low")


def get_number_from_user():
    user_input_string = input("Guess the number: ")
    user_input = None
    if user_input_string.isnumeric():
        user_input = int(user_input_string)
    else:
        print("You must input a number!")

    return user_input

# Run the guess_the_number function to test it
guess_the_number()
```
</details>

<!-- available callout types: info, success, warning, danger, secondary  -->
### !callout-secondary

## Each Function Does **One** Thing!

Notice in our code that now each function is doing exactly **one** thing.  `get_number_from_user` does just that, it reads in a number from the user.  Similarly `guess_the_number` now just processes the user's guess.  This makes each step *much* easier to read and test.

### !end-callout

### !callout-info

## None and potential Errors

Notice that in our version, if the user does not give a valid input, the return value will be `None`.  This will cause an error in the conditionals in `guess_the_number`, because `None` can not be compared to a number.  That's ok, we're building to a full solution.  Many times when writing code, it is useful to write and test a small portion, and then when we're confident that it works, moving on to build the next portion.

### !end-callout



<!-- ======================= END CHALLENGE ======================= -->
## Summary

Let's go back to the questions proposed in the introduction to this lesson.  What do functions add to our code?  

Now that we have broken the various sections into functions, we can easily swap the order of the games, play a game multiple times, or add new games in new functions and insert them in any order we want.  

Functions add flexibility and structure to our code, and make code easier to maintain and read.  In the next lesson we will work on adding more functionality to our functions with loops. 